CONTRIBUTORS.md, before:

# Contributors

**By adding your name, email address, and copyright date below, you understand and agree to the terms of the [Developer's Certificate of Origin](https://developercertificate.org/) (DCO) version 1.1, and you are submitting all contributions you make to this Project pursuant to the terms described in [LICENSE.md](LICENSE.md).**

## Signed-off-by

- Copyright 2012-2019 U.S. Federal Government (in countries where recognized)
-                     Michael A Neilson (michael.a.neilson@usace.army.mil)
- Copyright 2021 Resource Management Associates Inc.
-                    Adam Korynta (adam@rmanet.com)
- Copyright 2021 Michael A Neilson (m.allan.neilson@gmail.com)
-
- U.S. Federal Government (in countries where recognized)
-                Karl L Tarbet (karl.l.tarbet[@]usace.army.mil)
-  
- _Add the copyright date, your name, and email address here. (PLEASE KEEP THIS LINE)_

## Note for U.S. Federal Employees

If you're a U.S. Federal Government employee and use a `*.mil` or `*.gov` email address to agree to the DCO, we interpret your signed DCO to mean that the contribution was created in whole or in part by you as part of your job with the U.S. Federal Government and that your contribution is not subject to copyright protections.
Leave the copyright and year(s) blank.

# OpenDCS Contributors Include:

U.S. Geological Survey
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
U.S. Bureau of Reclamation
ILEX Engineering Incorporated
Sutron Corporation
Cove Software, LLC
Precision Water Resources Engineering
Xcellious Consulting
Resource Management Associates

Commit message:

Add note to CONTRIBUTORS.md

CONTRIBUTORS.md, after:

# Contributors

**By adding your name, email address, and copyright date below, you understand and agree to the terms of the [Developer's Certificate of Origin](https://developercertificate.org/) (DCO) version 1.1, and you are submitting all contributions you make to this Project pursuant to the terms described in [LICENSE.md](LICENSE.md).**

## Signed-off-by

- Copyright 2012-2019 U.S. Federal Government (in countries where recognized)
-                     Michael A Neilson (michael.a.neilson@usace.army.mil)
- Copyright 2021 Resource Management Associates Inc.
-                    Adam Korynta (adam@rmanet.com)
- Copyright 2021 Michael A Neilson (m.allan.neilson@gmail.com)
-
- U.S. Federal Government (in countries where recognized)
-                Karl L Tarbet (karl.l.tarbet[@]usace.army.mil)
-  
- _Add the copyright date, your name, and email address here. (PLEASE KEEP THIS LINE)_

## Note for U.S. Federal Employees

If you're a U.S. Federal Government employee and use a `*.mil` or `*.gov` email address to agree to the DCO, we interpret your signed DCO to mean that the contribution was created in whole or in part by you as part of your job with the U.S. Federal Government and that your contribution is not subject to copyright protections.
Leave the copyright and year(s) blank.

# OpenDCS Contributors Include:

- U.S. Geological Survey
- U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
- U.S. Bureau of Reclamation
- ILEX Engineering Incorporated
- Sutron Corporation
- Cove Software, LLC
- Precision Water Resources Engineering
- Xcellious Consulting
- Resource Management Associates

This is the list of contributors known at this time. If you know of an existing one
or are one yourself, please let us know or update the appropriate section in this file.
